big data is an elusive concept it
represents an amount of digital
information which is uncomfortable to
store transport or analyze the Gator is
so voluminous that it overwhelms the
technologies of the day and challenges
us to create the next generation of data
storage tools and techniques so big data
isn't new in fact physicists at CERN
have been wrangling with the challenge
of their ever-expanding Big Data for
decades fifty years ago CERN's data
could be stored in a single computer ok
so it wasn't your usual computer this
was a mainframe computer that filled an
entire building to analyze the data
physicists from around the world
traveled to CERN to connect to the
enormous machine in the 1970s our
ever-growing big data was distributed
across different sets of computers which
mushroomed at CERN each set was joined
together in dedicated home grid networks
but physicists collaborated without
regard for the boundaries between sets
and needed to access data on all of
these so we bridged the independent
networks together in our own Cir net in
the 1980's islands of similar networks
speaking different dialects sprung up
all over Europe and the states making
remote access possible but tortuous to
make it easy for our physicists across
the world to access the ever-expanding
big data stored at CERN without
traveling the networks needed to be
talking with the same language we
adopted the fledgling internet working
standard from the States followed by the
rest of Europe and we established the
principal link at CERN between Europe
and the States in 1989 and the truly
global internet took off
physicists could easily then access the
terabytes of big data remotely from
around the world generate results and
write papers in their home Institute's
then they wanted to share the findings
with all their colleagues to make this
information sharing easy we created the
web in the early 1990s physicists no
longer needed to know where the
information was stored in order to find
it and access it on the web an idea
which caught on across the world and has
transformed the way we communicate in
our daily lives during the early 2000s
the continued growth of our big data
outstripped our capability to analyze it
at CERN despite having buildings full of
computers we had to start distributing
the petabytes of data to our
collaborating partners in order to
employ local computing and storage at
hundreds of different institutes in
order to orchestrate these
interconnected resources with their
diverse technologies we developed a
computing grid enabling the seamless
sharing of computing resources around
the globe this relies on trust
relationships and mutual exchange but
this grid model could not be transferred
out of our communities so easily where
not everyone has resources to share nor
could companies be expected to have the
same level of trust instead an
alternative more businesslike approach
for accessing on-demand resources has
been flourishing recently called cloud
computing which other communities are
now exploiting to analyze their big data
it might seem paradoxical for a place
like CERN a lab focused on the study of
the unimaginably small building blocks
of matter to be the source of something
as big as big data but the way we study
the fundamental particles as well as the
forces by which they interact evolves
creating them fleetingly colliding
protons in our accelerators and
capturing a trace of them as they zoom
off near light speed to see those traces
our detector with a hundred and fifty
million sensors acts like a really
massive 3d camera taking a picture of
each collision event adds up to 40
million times per second that makes a
lot of data
but if Big Data has been around for so
long why do we suddenly keep hearing
about it now well as the old metaphor
explains the whole is greater than the
sum of its parts and it is no longer
just science that is exploiting this the
fact that we can derive more knowledge
by joining related information together
and spotting correlations can inform and
enrich numerous aspects of everyday life
either in real time such as traffic or
financial conditions in short term
evolutions such as medical or
meteorological or in predictive
situations such as business crime or
disease trends virtually every field is
turning to gathering big data with
mobile sensor networks spanning the
globe cameras on the ground and in the
air
archives storing information published
on the web and loggers capturing the
activities of Internet citizens world
over the challenge is on to invent new
tools and techniques to mine these vast
stores to inform decision making to
improve medical diagnosis and otherwise
to answer needs and desires of tomorrow
society in ways that are unimaginable
you